Yeah okay First of all I'd just like to ask you a personal question about how
you got started back in science fiction years ago How I got started reading it
or how I got started writing it Reading it way back when you were in your
teenage years Oh that's kind of that's kind of interesting Most people don't
believe this story but I actually discovered science fiction when I was
wandering around a garbage dump um there was a garbage dump a few blocks from
our house and i like at that time when i was i guess about 10 or 11 or something
sometimes friends and i would just go down and look around and see what people
were drawing out and one day among the things that we found people who had
thrown out were a couple of old bolt magazines from the year before uh amazing
stories and i think there was one amazing stories and one fantastic adventures
those being companion magazines so i grabbed of those and brought them home. And
I loved them. I got hooked right there. I started looking for the magazines on
the newsstand. And of course found that there were a whole lot of other
magazines on the newsstands. Planet Stories, Startling Stories, Astounding,
Thrilling Wonder Stories, Weird Tales. And began buying all of them almost
immediately.
Okay, what about how you got involved in the fan movement, the fan structure?
Well, that drew right directly out of the reading of the pulp magazine, because
at that time, every magazine being published had a letter column, usually a long
letter column, full of letters from the readers saying what they had thought of
the previous issue, and often asking for correspondence, and their addresses
would be published there. So I began writing to anybody who was living around
the San Francisco area where I was living then. And got into correspondence
with, I guess, about two or three different people. And through them, I
got in touch with the local science fiction club, the Golden Gate Futurian
Society. And I joined that. And at the same time, of course, a number of the
magazines were running fanzine review columns. And I simply sent off a bunch of
fanzines and immediately began writing for them. At that time, the first things,
of course, I was writing were amateur science fiction stories, which were quite
terrible, but a whole lot of them got published in those early fanzines. And
shortly thereafter, began branching out and doing other things, critical
articles and things like that. I don't think I actually published a fanzine for
several years. It was 1952 when I published my first one. Because I was too
young. I didn't have any money and no experience and things like that. So I
gradually worked my way into publishing fanzines. During the 50s and then on
through the 60s I was very prolific at publishing fanzines. I still do publish
them occasionally, but not too often these days. I simply don't have time.
I know this is an obvious question, but I imagine a lot of our listeners may not
know this. Could you just briefly explain what a fanzine is? Yeah. Fanzines are
amateur magazines, usually not published for profit, you know, not even with
hope of profit, published by readers of science fiction,
usually dealing either directly or indirectly with science fiction itself.
Articles on science fiction, articles on science fiction writers or science
fiction fans themselves. And sometimes just on the things that interest science
fiction fans, because of course the people who read science fiction have a wide
variety of interests, but the particular interests of science fiction fans tend
to be more intellectual, more scientifically oriented
so that it's worthwhile for science fiction readers to publish things and just
get in contact with other people who read the same things they do and think
about the same things they do a typical science fiction fan, especially in the
50s before science fiction was nearly as popular as it is today, was somebody
who didn't know anybody else, had never met anybody else who was interested in
science fiction. Probably most people who knew him or her felt that they were
crazy or had terribly bad taste or something like that. So it was always fun to
get in touch with other people who read the same things you did. And the fan
movement grew out of that. The fan movement actually started about 1930, but of
course I came in pretty late on that. It was going for a long time before I ever
got into it. Okay, you won a Hugo, I believe, in 1959 for Best Fan Publication
or something of that sort. Could you explain that? Yeah, I was publishing with a
friend of mine named Ronnie, like, a fanzine called Fan Act, which is a science
fiction. Right.
All right. Mr. Carr? Yes? Hold on, please. We have a technical problem on this
end.
Alright That's very strange, okay As soon as I told you we had a technical
problem We no longer have the technical problem I'll be right back, hang on Okay
It happened when you touched that Did it have any of you with it? No, it
happened in between One of your questions We've got a problem with this line
right here But it doesn't Give us any problem unless you move it while you're
talking I don't know, just don't move anything, did he? Okay.
Now, where are we?
You were, I think, in the middle of your answer about the Hugo for Fanac. Why
don't we just start that one again, because we missed about a 30-second hunk of
it there. Okay. In 1958, I started publishing a science fiction fanzine, news
magazine called Fanax, which is science fiction language for fan activity. I was
publishing it with a friend of mine named Ronnie, who has since died. And we
were reporting on the things that other fans were doing. The fanzines are
publishing conventions that were coming up. Things like that, of people who was
getting married and children born and things like that. Sometimes we would
report also on the things science fiction writers were writing or publishers
were doing, magazines that were starting up or dying at the time. But we didn't
concentrate on that because there were other science fiction fanzines that were
devoted specifically to news about science fiction itself. And they were well
established at that time, so we didn't want to compete with them. We
concentrated on fandom itself. and we were publishing it every week like
clockwork and it became very popular it became a point where I don't know
everybody who got it said this is an indispensable thing to have if you're going
to be in fandom because you'll never know what's going on etc it was a time when
there were a lot of controversies going on in fandom and we were reporting on
those and a lot of people got involved in it and indeed it was a very important
fanzine for its time it also became popular because we didn't just report on the
news we also commented on it and we were rather how shall I say sarcastic,
ironic we didn't treat it with total seriousness if we thought something was
absolutely silly we would say so and we would make fun of things and people like
that aspect of it so a little over a year after we actually started the fanzines
we received the Hugo Award as the best fanzine of the year that was given to us
in 1959
Okay good for just a little while I'd like to go into your editing career I
believe from 1964 1964 to 1971, you edited for Ace. Could you tell me what you
did for that? Yeah, in 1964, I went to work for Ace Books as an editorial
assistant, which actually meant that I was a low man on the totem pole. I was
simply somebody who copied his manuscripts, went over them to make sure the
spelling was correct and things like that. there were no topographical errors.
And then proofread the books before they actually got published to make sure,
once again, that there were no topographical errors in the typesetting. I would
write blurbs, cover copy, kind of, you know, the things that are written on the
front and back covers of paperback books to try to get you to be interested
enough in the book to buy it. and at the same time I was reading a number of
submissions that were coming in and if I saw something good I would pass it on
to the editor so it was Donald Wollheim now the editor of DAW Books and
gradually as things went along I just got more and more involved in that and
worked my way up in the company a lot of my suggestions for things that I
thought we ought to be doing were taken seriously and
Ace Books did start doing a number of things that I had suggested. So
I began getting this and that promotion. And I think after about the first three
years, I became a senior editor there.
And began a series called the Ace Science Fiction Specials, which was very much
a departure for Ace books in particular, but for the entire field for that
matter, because it was specifically designed to publish adult science fiction
novels, not simply juvenile adventure. but serious novels using the science
fiction genre as its format and packaged uniformly so that people would be able
to recognize a new book in the series when it came out and packaged in such a
way that, you know, it didn't have monsters chasing half-naked women on the
covers. It had very good artwork by a team of artists called Leo and Diane
Dillon, who later won a Hugo Award and won two Calicotte Awards and God knows
what else they were extremely good artists I also began anthologizing very early
when I started there John Waltham and I were collaborating on an anthology an
annual anthology called World's Best Science Fiction and I gradually branched
out from that since I had begun to have my name on anthologies. I began to do
others for Doubleday and Fawcett Books and so on. That was actually how I got my
start doing anthologies was the work that I was doing at Ace Books.
Okay, good. That answered a lot of the other questions I would have about Ace
too. How many series, like say the Universe series or the best science fiction
of the year, how many continuing series anthologies are you doing right now?
Right now, I'm doing exactly three. I'm doing the Universe Series, of which
number 12 will be published in June by Doubleday. I'm doing the Best Science
Fiction of the Year, of which number 11 will be published in July by Timescape
and paperback. And I'm doing Fantasy Annual, of which number 5 will be published
in November, I believe, by Timescape. Fantasy Annual is another Best of the
Year, but that is devoted to fantasy. I occasionally do individual anthologies,
too, but mostly I try to concentrate on those series books. Weren't you doing
one too, the best science fiction novellas of the year? Yeah, I did two volumes
of the best science fiction novellas of the year a few years ago, and they
simply did not sell well enough. Evidently, people wanted to have a greater
variety in the length of their story, that they were reading. They didn't want
to have five novellas all in one book. They wanted to have maybe two or three
novellas and some novelettes and short stories all stuck together. So after the
first two books, when that experiment didn't prove to be successful, it was
simply dropped. And I moved to Best Science Fiction of the Year from the
publishers of Best Science Fiction Novellas and Best Science Fiction of the Year
who were Valentine Delray books over to Timescape Books and lengthened the book
from, I think it was 125,000 words I was doing at that time. I lengthened it to
150,000 words so that I could put in one or two more novellas. And now I'm doing
a much more balanced book than I was ever doing before. Essentially what I'm
doing now is both of those books put together.
Okay. Okay. The Universe Series, now that's totally original science fiction,
right? Yes, it is. That's right. Could you explain the difference, say, to an
author? I'm kind of hazy on this, like an author who has a story to sell. What's
the difference between selling to an original anthology like that or a magazine
like Analog or Amazing or something? There are all sorts of differences.
There are both artistic and monetary differences. The one thing, if you sell to
a magazine, then the money that you get from the magazine is simply the payment
for that use of the story. If you sell it to an original anthology, that's going
into a book, and you get an advance payment. But after that, you get a share of
the royalties. If the book sells well, then there will be additional earnings on
the book, and the individual authors will continue to make money for years
thereafter, and indeed they do on universe because it does sell pretty well. So
your chances of making money on your story are at least as good, I would say, in
the original anthologies as they are in the science fiction magazines. Aside
from that, there's also the fact that a lot of writers simply like to have their
work appear in book form because they know it's going to be around to be read
longer than a magazine will be. it'll stay in better shape and it'll be in
libraries and things like that and there's also a certain cachet a certain
prestige to appearing in one of the original anthologies because over the years
the original anthologies have proven to be a source of much if not most of the
best science fiction being published so that automatically if you sell to
Universe or to New Dimensions, one of the other original anthology series. You
know that your work is going to be appearing along with much of the other best
work to appear in the year, and you also know that people are going to be
looking for those books and expecting to find the best work, so that if you have
a really good story, for instance, and maybe you think you have a chance at
winning an award, a nebula, or a Hugo, or something like that, your chances are
somewhat enhanced. if you're in one of these original anthologies, because
people who are looking for the really top stories, think of those first. And I
think, possibly, they tend to think of what has appeared in those first also
when it comes time to nominate the thing. Or it may just be that the best
stories do appear in those books. But in any case, I once did a breakdown of
where the stories of the past ten years that have won Nebula's and or Hugo's had
appeared. And there's a disproportionate amount. I think it's something like 40%
of them had appeared in original stories anthologies.
Okay. What about an editor's... Say your function as the editor of the Universe
series. I mean, do you actively seek stories? Do you editorially comment and ask
for changes in the stories? Like, what would be the difference between you doing
that and, say, an editor for a magazine. There's not a great deal of difference
between what I do as an editor and what a magazine editor will do. We both will
work with an author if a story seems good enough to sell to us but not quite
right. We want a few changes. Then, of course, we'll discuss them with the
author and see if the author agrees and wants to make those changes. There's no
difference there. The prime difference between the way I work, well, two
differences between the way I work and the way magazine editors work. Number
one, a magazine editor has a deadline every month to get a magazine out. So the
magazine editor really has to have
a certain number of stories to publish every month, whether or not enough really
top stories have come in, the editor still has to publish the magazine. I don't
have that problem. I get a contract, and I have about six months to put together
a book. It usually takes me about two or three months to get enough stories, but
if I need the full six months, I can do that. So I don't have a tight deadline,
and I can keep my standards higher.
Secondarily, I work differently from most of the magazine editors in that I have
more time because I'm only doing one book a year. to go around to specific
authors and ask them for a story that they're working on. They may not have that
story ready for another three, four, or six months, but I can talk to them in
advance and say, well, I'll be buying next April or something like that, so
please send it to me then. Most of the stories that I get on submissions are
from people I know either personally or through the mails as writers. from whom
I've not solicited stories, whereas the magazines try to do that, but they're
very heavily overworked editors at the magazines because they have these
constant deadlines. And they don't have time, as much time as I do anyway, to go
after individual authors and ask for stories. So I think there's a higher
percentage of stories that I buy from authors I've asked for stories by.
Okay, on the Best Science Fiction of the Year series, could you just tell me a
little bit about the criteria you use to pick stories? Do you go only for the
best stories, or do you look for balance? Do you look for the names, or what
kind of criteria do you have? I go about 90% for the best stories. The names
don't bother me because it always turns out that most of the best stories are by
name writers This is how they became name writers in the first place, by writing
good stories As I read during the year all year long sort of day by day, week by
week, month by month every time I read a story that I think is a particularly
good story a candidate for the best science fiction of the year or the best
fantasy annual Old the Best Fantasy of the Year, I make a card and I put it in
the card file. And that card will tell me the title of the author, where it
appeared, how long it is, and give a brief precie of the plot. And at the end of
the year, I simply go through those cards and pick out what I consider to be the
best 150,000 words out of that. And then I look at that to see what the
editorial balance is like. Um, I, I do want to be sure that there aren't too
many stories that are down-to-depressing because that's just not fun to read.
They may be good stories individually, but you can string them all end-to-end
and, and they can actually, uh, seem not as good as they are. So, I try to work
on that kind of balance, and I try to mix up the balance between longer stories
and shorter stories because people do like variety in that. and if it should
ever happen for instance that I think the best 15 stories of the year however
many it takes are all time travel stories for instance I'm not going to publish
a whole book full of time travel stories that's just silly again people would
get tired of reading so many time travel stories in one book so I try to mix up
the themes too but the editorial balance is really something that I do after
I've chosen the best stories themselves and rarely does it make a great deal of
difference in the balance of the book itself. Usually, there is a lot of variety
in all of these things already so that I don't have to tinker too much.
Okay, could you just give me maybe a little philosophy or theory behind an
anthology? What kind of need does it fill?
It's kind of a vague question, as best I know an anthology builds a need for
people who want to read good science fiction short stories novelettes novellas
whatever people who want to read something other than a novel probably people
who want to have something they can dip into from time to time rather than
sitting down and reading the whole thing straight through as they would a novel
there's a different psychology between reading novels and short stories, and
most people do prefer to read novels. They always sell better than anthologies
or single-author short story collections. But there are people who like the
short stories. I do, for instance. They're the people who buy these. For a
reprint anthology, I think, you know, like the best science fiction of the year
or some other kind of anthology, you know, the theme anthologies that come out.
a whole bunch of stories about robots or something like that. On a repun
anthology, the attraction, I think, is that these stories have been doubly
screened. They're stories that were good enough in the first place to sell to
the magazine, and beyond that, they are the best stories from the magazine. So
the people who pick up an anthology can reasonably expect that that is going to
contain more good stories than the average issue of a science fiction magazine.
this isn't always true there's some very bad anthologies there's some very good
issues of magazines but by and large that is the case I think
ok, I know you've done a lot of theme or specialized anthologies I have a whole
list of them here in front of me I just wanted to say pick out a couple and ask
a question on them this earlier one called Science Fiction for People Who Hate
Science Fiction how did you go about picking those stories? that was My first
anthology that I did under my own name, and nobody else's name, it was, I think,
in fact, the second anthology I did right after I first wrote about science
fiction. And the idea on it was, I wanted a book that could be given to people
who don't normally read science fiction, who think that they wouldn't like it.
And I wanted, first, that the story should be good stories, And second, that the
story should be accessible to people who don't know the specialized language of
science fiction. There are a whole lot of assumptions that are just automatic in
science fiction, and nobody bothers to explain them anymore. So there are a lot
of stories that are published these days that really require a certain amount of
background in reading science fiction in order to understand them. Nobody stops
to explain what a star warp drive is anymore because that gets a little bit
tiresome after a while. We all know how a Star Warp drive works, more or less.
Or at least we think we do. But to somebody who's never heard of that before,
that can be kind of confusing. Or the intricacies of the
morality of robot behavior,
or the strangeness of time paradoxes. Things like that can be very confusing. to
someone first coming to science fiction. So the stories that I chose for that
book were stories that had very simple dramatic ideas that were very easy to
understand to someone who was not used to science fiction right away, but that
were also very good stories. And the theory on the book was that people would
buy that. A number of them would simply buy it for themselves, and also a number
of them would buy it to give to friends theirs in hopes of convincing them that
they might like science fiction, too. And the book sold pretty well. In fact,
it's still in print and in a small favorite back edition. I think it was
published about 16 years ago, and it's still in print.
Good, yeah, I was going to ask if it was still in print. Yeah, it's in print
from, I think it's a Collier book. Okay, another one I had a brief question on
was a more recent one, Dream's Edge, science fiction stories about the future of
the Planet Earth. I understand that was done sort of with the Sierra Club. Could
you explain the origin or the impetus for that one? Yeah, the origin of that was
that the Sierra Club themselves decided they wanted to publish a science fiction
anthology. And they looked around for someone to do it, and they eventually
landed on me, partly because I was known as an anthologist, and partly because
the Sierra Club's main offices are in San Francisco, and I live nearby. So they
got in touch with me, and we discussed the book. and I went ahead and put it
together. The main problem I had with that book was that there were too many
stories in it that were downbeat and depressing. If you start writing about the
ecology of Earth, which is what the theme of that was,
well, everything's going wrong these days, as you know, and nobody really has
any answers about what we can do about it. And if people picked up that book to
find that science fiction writers had the answers that were going to save us,
they were going to be disappointed because there simply aren't any. If there
were any answers, it wouldn't be in a science fiction book, you know. It would
be something that was being done already. So even though I think all the stories
in there are very good, there are only a few of them that hold out a whole lot
of hope. Most of them are about the problem, the ironies of messing around with
the environment and so on. I have to confess I haven't been able to find that
book. Is it in paperback? Yeah, it's in a trade paperback, again, from Sierra
Club Books. Okay, I'm a member of the Sierra Club, too, I just haven't been able
to get a hold of that. I expect you can get it. It's probably on their back list
somewhere. It was only published, what, about a year and a half ago. Okay, would
it be fair to ask you? These are very small hard cutters anyway, so I'm sure
that's out of print. But the paperback, that's much larger printing okay could I
ask you if you have any particular favorites among the anthologies you put
together
yeah I have as a matter of fact a number of them are favorites of mine I think
oh there are a number of the best science fiction of the year volumes that I
think are extremely good just because they're a very good year a lot of good
stories appeared in those years I couldn't tell you the exact numbers or the
exact years, but there were some from the early 70s, for instance. One or two of
the more recent ones, some of the ones from the late 60s, I think, are extremely
good. There's one that had two novelettes by Roger Zelazny that he was just
starting out in science fiction, was writing at the height of his powers, and a
bunch of other good stories. But aside from that, there's an anthology that I
did for Harper & Row about five years ago called Classic Science Fiction, The
First Golden Age, which is a big, thick anthology of stories from 1940 to 1942,
which is generally considered the time that science fiction first became really
good. And I went back and read every one of the magazines, published in those
three years, and there were very many of those magazines, and I chose all of the
stories that I considered the best, most of which turned out to be pretty well
-known stories. They're classic stories by his bootstraps, by Robert A.
Heinlein, and the Twonky by Henry Kuttner, and so on. But at the same time, I
also did a lot of research on the writers, on the editors, the publishing
companies, the artists, and so forth, the conditions under which they worked,
how much money they were actually able to make. And I wrote a great deal of
introductory material, background material about the writers and what they were
doing and how they came to write each individual story. I interviewed these
writers either in person or by mail. I looked through all the old magazines or
whatever was said there. And since I collect old fanzines, I had a lot of the
fan magazines that were published in the early 40s so that I had more or less
direct information there too about what was happening. And I think the anthology
itself contains a number of just classic stories It's a basic anthology for
anybody's science fiction library. But in addition to that, that background
material is fascinating. It tells a whole lot of things about how things
happened and why they happened. And it also tells a number of pretty amusing
stories about things that went on behind the scenes. I really enjoyed doing the
book. Yeah, I'm familiar with that one. I've read that that's considered to be
one of your best. Let me ask you one more question about your work as an editor.
How does a freelance editor work anyhow? Do you make contracts with the authors
and give them payment and then go to the publisher? Or what are the mechanics of
that? The mechanics are that first I sell the book to the publisher. There's no
way I can make a contact with the author unless I have some money to offer. So I
go to the publisher first. The publisher buys it and gives me a contract which
guarantees me a certain amount of money, whatever it is on any given book. and I
then do my my buying from the authors and make individual contracts with them
ok that explains it if you have a little more time I'd like to go on to just a
little bit about your own writing sure ok from what I understand you had your
first professional story published in 1962 what he who sucks with the devil or
he who sucks with the devil I believe it was That's right, yes. Okay, could you
tell me the, oh, I don't know, about when you decided you wanted to become a
professional writer and, you know, how you got the first story published, just a
little bit about that. Yeah, I, in 1961, I had been living in the Bay Area. And
I suddenly decided I was going to just leave the Bay Area. I didn't like the way
life was going here. I wasn't doing anything. I was 24 years old and didn't
really have a direction to my life yet. So I went to New York City to visit with
a friend of mine for a month or however long. And as soon as I got there, I
thought, well, gee, I don't have a job. I really ought to do something to make
some money. And I had been writing science fiction stories, as I said earlier,
since I was a kid. I was 11 years old or so. So I turned back to writing science
fiction. And at one point, I had a copy of that story, Who Sucks With the Devil?
And I was actually working on another story. That story was on commission with a
magazine, which wanted to buy it, but they weren't sure they were going to have
a second issue or not. So it was kind of on hold. And the editor of fantasy and
science fiction, Arvin Davidson, came into the office where I was working. It
was an office where a number of us were working. And he had just become the
editor. In fact, that day, he came in to announce to us that he was the new
editor of fantasy and science fiction. And he saw that I was...
And I said, well, the one I'm working on now isn't finished, but I do have this
other one. And I showed him the carbon copy of that. He just, he went into the
other room and read it and came back in five minutes and said he liked it and he
would buy it, which totally blew my mind. You know, a guy just walks in the door
and buys your first story like that. So he took that and in fact he bought the
next half dozen stories that I wrote. In fact, thereafter, I haven't written a
single story since that time that I haven't eventually been able to sell. I
don't have any stories sitting in my trunk that are unsalvageable or anything
like that.
Okay. one thing that's puzzled me a little bit in 1973 you got another Hugo
which I believe was for the best fan writer of the year that's right yeah how
can you be considered a fan when you've been publishing professional science
fiction there's nothing stopping you from being a fan just because you make your
money writing professionally I didn't get that award for the stories that I was
publishing in professional magazines. I got that for the material that I was
writing for amateur magazines because I hadn't stopped doing that. I'm still
interested in the amateur field. It's quite different from the professional
field. And I had written a number of things the previous year, enough things
that people liked that I managed to win that award that year. A lot of other
people who have won that award are professionals and were professionals at the
time that they won it. the first Hugo Ward the best fan writer went to Alexei
Panshan who was a professional at the time the second went to Ted White who was
a professional at the time and among the other people who have won her have been
Bob Shaw who's won her twice he's been writing professionally for about 15 years
and a number of other professional writers have won her people who have never
sold professionally have also won her it's really just a matter of doing work in
the amateur magazines, work that you give away for nothing, essentially, that
you do for love, as opposed to work that you write for money.
Okay, that's good enough.
Your last novel, I guess it was published in 1977, Cirque, I've admired that
book for some time. I know what the word Cirque means, I think, but I'm not sure
why you picked it for the title. Could you explain that? I picked it for the
title because I couldn't think of a better title, actually. And the more I
thought about it, the more I realized that that was the inevitable title of the
book. The book, of course, is about a city which is built around a gigantic
chasm into the ground. And so the city is named Cirque, which is French for
circle and has other connotations too. It also, for instance, it's the French
word for circus and it was kind of a circus. There were a whole lot of things,
strange things going on at once in the book. And the construction of the book is
circular. It starts at dawn on one day and it goes ahead to finish at dawn the
next day and it finishes at the same place in the city where it began with the
same characters there. So in all those ways, Cirque or Circle was the perfect
title for the book. The only thing it really had going against it is that nobody
knows how to pronounce it or at least nobody is sure how to pronounce it. Yeah,
I teach English here at Odessa College and I'm very sensitive to the way books
are put together and I was very impressed with the tight structure of that, the
coherence and the way you interwove the various characters and brought them
together at the end was just fascinating to me. It was very difficult to do
because I didn't have an outline for the book. I was making it up as I went
along. And the closer I got to the end, the more panicked I got about whether or
not I was actually going to be able to pull it off. I actually had to do two
drafts of it to make sure that it worked out properly. And I think it did. In
fact, it worked out so neatly in the second to final draft that I actually had
to go back through the ending and make a few things not quite as neat as they
had been because it seemed a little bit too tight
You said you weren't following a plan and so forth but I got the impression you
were deliberately injecting symbolism or almost kind of an allegory into it with
say the abyss that collects all the filth from the garbage and breeds these
monsters which later turn into flowers and so forth, were you deliberately
attempting a symbolic structure? Oh yes, that is definitely deliberate. I knew
the general outline of the story I just didn't know the specifics of who was
going to do what at which time and where they were going to be and so on. The
symbolism is built into the whole concept of the story and I tried not to make
that show too much on the top. I wanted the surface to be a story that was
interesting in and of itself because I don't believe that symbolism itself
should ever try to carry a story. That pours me to tears. On the other hand, if
you have a good story up front and beneath that story is symbolism, preferably
emotional symbolism, not just intellectual cuteness, I think that strengthens
the story a good deal. There's a fair amount of symbolism in a number of my
short stories too.
Okay, at the end of that story it seems like everyone is better off Nikki, the
girl with the multiple personalities, Annelly, the telepath Jamie, gloriana,
they all discovered something it seems Could you explain what it is that they
found out? Essentially what it is that they found out is that reality is what
you make of it through various means some of them, I mean On the surface, again,
it was a matter of coming to realize that you could make these monsters into
flowers. This sounds silly when we talk about it. See why I don't like to talk
about my plot. You could turn monsters into flowers simply by thinking of them
as flowers, as something beautiful and good and pleasing because of the nature
of the monster. But in other ways, all of the characters come to realize that
they have control of their own lives, so they can look at their lives any way
they want and they can do anything that they want. And so they all, in one way
or another, by the end of the book, have made positive choices in their own
lives as a result of the adventures they've gone through during the touring.
I know it must be difficult for an author to get questions like that on his own
work, but let me try one more on that book, The Millipede.
he was part well I guess he was my favorite character in the book he seemed to
be all knowing and in control of the situation and so forth why was he necessary
for these people I mean why couldn't these people have found out what they
needed to know without his part in the story so that again is built into the
idea of the story actually he was there because I just love writing about aliens
because I love writing a lot of straining minds about that. And that particular
alien, by the way, is not a he, it's an it. And I was very careful not to say he
anywhere in there. It's an alien who doesn't have any particular sex. But
anyway, that alien sees time, both the future and the past. All is happening at
once. And the alien is not so much in control of the situation as simply knowing
what's going to happen and accepting it because it's inevitable. The future is
as inevitable as the past to this alien.
And the alien doesn't actually control what goes on, but the alien is a
catalyst. Just as, for instance, I think it's Annalee who is the telepathic
monitor is the ultimate catalyst because it is she who broadcasts telepathically
to the other people her vision of exactly what can happen to make things work
out better at the end. So it isn't really the Millipede who does it, but had the
Millipede not been there, things would have happened differently because the
Millipede had its effect on Annelie and so forth and all the other characters. On
the other hand, the Millipede could not be there because, as the book is set up,
the Millipede was there. The Millipede knows it. The Millipede, for instance, at one
point,
takes a great risk of getting killed. But the Millipede knows what's going to
happen to it and knows that that risk and the pain that goes with it is going to
happen. And indeed, the Millipede doesn't have any... The Millipede is the only
character in the book who has no self-balition in that the Millipede knows
exactly what the future holds and his power was to change it. Whereas the other
people who are unable to see what the future holds do have the power to change
things. And that's one of the things that actually comes out of the book. I
don't think anybody's actually noticed that thought about this book, but most of
the people have happy endings because they take over control 0-5. The millitide
has a happy ending simply because the millitide
what happens to the millitide was always going to be a happy ending and the
millitide knew it. I don't know if that's coherent but it's difficult to talk
about this kind of thing. It's very difficult to work with that concept in the
book and try to make it coherent in the book. I think it works in the book
because you follow what happened with the story. no I can follow that I got that
out of the book personally
just a second David we have to change tape now yeah listen I have about 5 or 10
more minutes could you give us that much more sure okay David has to switch the
tape just a second we've got to turn it around Thank you.